do not be envious of evil men nor desire
to be with them for their heart devises
violence and their lips talk of
troublemaking through wisdom a house is
built and by understanding it is
established by knowledge the rooms are
filled with old precious and pleasant
riches a wise man is strong yes
a man of knowledge increases strength
for by wise counsel you will wage your
own war and in a multitude of counselors
there is safety wisdom is too lofty for
a fool he does not open his mouth in the
gate he who plots to do evil will be
called a schemer the devising of
foolishness is sin and the scoffer is an
abomination to men if you faint in the
day of adversity your strength is small
deliver those who are drawn toward death
and hold back those stumbling to the
slaughter if you say surely we did not
know this does not he who weighs the
hearts considerate he who keeps your
soul does he not know it and will he not
render to each man according to his
deeds my son eat honey because it is
good and the honeycomb which is sweet to
your taste so shall the knowledge of
wisdom be to your soul
if you have found it there is a prospect
and your hope will not be cut off do not
lie in wait a wicked man against the
dwelling of the righteous do not plunder
his resting place for a righteous man
may fall seven times and rise again but
the wicked shall fall by calamity do not
rejoice when your enemy Falls and do not
let your heart be glad when he stumbles
lest the Lord see it and it displeased
him and he turn away his wrath from him
do not fret because of evildoers nor be
envious of the wicked for there will be
no prospect for the evil man the lamp of
the wicked will be put out
my son fear the Lord and the king do not
associate with those given to change for
their calamity will rise suddenly and
who knows the ruin those two can bring
these things also belong to the wise it
is not good to show partiality in
judgment he who says to the wicked you
are righteous him the people will curse
nations will abhor him but those who
rebuke the wicked will have delight and
a good blessing will come upon them he
who gives a right answer kisses the lips
prepare your outside work make it fit
for yourself in the field and afterward
build your house do not be a witness
against your neighbor without cause for
would you deceive with your lips do not
say I will do to him just as he has done
to me I will render to the man according
to his work I went by the field of the
lazy man and by the vineyard of the man
devoid of understanding and there it was
all overgrown with thorns its surface
was covered with Nettles its stone wall
was broken down when I saw it I
considered it will
I looked on it and received instruction
a little sleep a little slumber a little
folding of the hands to rest so shall
your poverty come like a prowler and
your need like an armed man